Project : The pianica is a musical instrument similar to a piano but in a smaller version. It has note bars like a piano, but the way it is played is different. The pianica is played by blowing air into it and pressing the keys to produce sound. It consists of seven basic notes, namely C, D, E, F, G, A, B and C’. A note recognition system is needed to help identify these basic notes on the pianica, especially for beginners. This research aims to design an audio-based pianica note recognition system that can automatically and in real-time recognize the basic notes. The pianica sound data is captured using an external microphone at a distance of about 15 cm and recorded in WAV format. The method used involves signal pre-processing (normalization, signal trimming, frame blocking, windowing, FFT), followed by feature extraction using segment averaging, and classification using a backpropagation neural network (BPNN) with one hidden layer containing 8 neurons and a ReLU activation function. The activation function used at the output layer is softmax to identify the note with the highest probability. The testing results show that the best configuration is achieved with the combination of 30 epochs, batch size of 2, 8 neurons, and 32 input features, resulting in a note recognition accuracy of up to 91.25% in several variations. This note recognition system has been successfully developed and performs well in real-time testing with perfect accuracy for all basic notes. However, the current program is limited to recognizing single-octave basic notes, so future development can be directed toward recognizing more complex or multi-octave notes. The higher the number of features generated from segment averaging, the higher the accuracy shown by the system.
